The interview recorded with Steve Halfway on 8th March 2017 contains some stories which listeners may find upsetting.
Please proceed to listen at your own discretion.
We will now begin recording the interview with Steve Halfway.
The recording takes place on the 8th of March at Oasis on Splot Road.
The volunteers present are Kayleigh Williams and Lara Taffer.
This recording is being collected as an oral history and will be part of the Chronicle Project, a project led by VCS Cymru and funded by the Heritage Lottery Fund.
Would you like to introduce yourself please?
My name is Steve and I live in Splot and I've lived here for about 20 years now.
I was originally born in Abergavenny which is a little town about an hour away.
I can't speak English but I've been living in Splot for 20 years and the local phrase is I'm now a Splot boy and I feel like I live and belong here.
Could you tell us the story again about how you started volunteering at Oasis?
Okay, about two years ago my big passion is music and I noticed there was a concert on for a Congolese choir
and I was looking at the flyer on the internet and it said there would also be a small community choir from a local refugee centre.
I thought that's surprising so I looked it up, it was called Oasis, and I was really surprised to find that it was just 100 yards from where I lived.
So I thought, oh that'll be interesting, I'll send them an email and say I haven't got any particular skills, however I can speak English and I'm quite friendly.
And take it from there. So I sent the email and they invited me along.
And how many years ago was that?
That was probably over two years.
Did you do any other volunteering before you came to Oasis?
I might have done but I can't remember.
But anyway, do you want me to tell you about the first time I came down?
So I came down as a UK national where everything is well ordered, got a national insurance number, the streets are metal, the street lights come on every day, you turn on the tap and you get water.
And I came down to Oasis and I met people from all over the world.
And when I came in I felt a bit uncomfortable because basically I was the only white person there.
And I went into the cafe room and I'd say that most of the people there would be young black African men where their future is uncertain.
They would be asylum seekers where they would come from a part of the world which may well be war torn, where there may not be water on tap, where there might not be metal roads, where things aren't certain.
So it was quite amazing to come in to meet people from around the world where my world is very certain and safe and secure.
And their world on that day would be, they would be asylum seekers in Britain but at any moment they could be told by the home office, sorry you're off home tomorrow.
And so what kind of things do you volunteer for at the centre? What are some of your responsibilities?
Well I came down just to see what was what and then they pointed me in the direction of being in charge of the garden.
And I thought well okay I'll give it a go. And I came down about a week later all ready to make a start.
And I was the only person there waiting to start. And I thought well hang on.
And again this is what I found out about Oasis which is what I like is that things aren't particularly well organised.
There's about three different time zones, African time zone, British time zone and Middle Eastern time zone.
And they don't marry up. But anyway I thought well I don't think this is going to work.
So I hear that they did some English so I went in and said oh you know I understand you do some English.
How about if I help out with the English teacher? And that's how I then went along to the first English class.
And she was a very good teacher actually. The current English teacher is good but not as good as the first English teacher.
So I went along and I did some work with her and I did it once a week up until now.
Have you ever had the chance to, if music's your passion, share that passion with the people at the refugee centre?
Well occasionally there's been some music here but I can't play an instrument and I can't read the instrument.
But music is my great passion. I go to loads of music. And when they have some music on here I come and listen to it.
And it's brilliant.
Although another thing I've got involved with as well as helping teach English, I help with this conversation group called the fan group called Friends and Neighbours.
And via that I've got to know some Sudanese Muslim women. And recently I arranged for them to come to the opera.
And they absolutely loved it. The opera was really good. Welsh National Opera, a world class opera company.
They were doing La Boeme which is a beautiful opera. And the Welsh National Opera did it to a very high standard which I really enjoyed.
But the Sudanese Muslim women absolutely loved it. And I'm passionate about music.
But the thing about opera, if you go to the audiences, dominated by white pensioners. There's no question about it.
If you go to the opera it'll be dominated by affluent white pensioners.
But I like to take young people. And on this occasion I took three Sudanese Muslim women. And they loved it.
In fact the young people loved it and the Sudanese Muslim people loved it. So it doesn't have to just be a preserve for old white Afro people.
And so what motivated you to get involved with volunteering here?
It seemed like an interest. I'm interested in the world. And probably at the time I thought well I'll be interested. Try it out.
But in retrospect, yeah it's been magnificent. And I've got more out of it than I've put in.
Because just by walking down the road I meet people from all over the world.
For example the fan group. One week there was some women from Mosul and also some men from Aleppo.
And how current is that? I mean you can see it on the news, you can read about it on the internet, on the newspapers.
But actually come to meet people who've lived through those experiences. And I find that immense.
One of our questions is how does volunteering help you get to know your community better?
Well my local community is... I'm well known in my street and they are overwhelmingly white and lived here for decades.
And a few of them are racists to be quite frank. And I know the racists.
But some people in... I'd say that these are part of my community as well. The refugees and asylum seekers.
And the thing I like about Splott is that over the 20 years I've lived here it has become more and more multicultural.
And I don't say that people love each other, but they get on. Which is really magnificent.
And what I'm proud of in Splott is that this place sits here and there's no bother. No bother.
I'm not saying that the local community can flood it in and they all do things together.
But it sits here, it's quite obviously for... the great majority of people who come in will be young African men.
But it doesn't have any problems.
One of the groups that we've interviewed before was Adams Down Arts Association.
And... pause for a second.
So I was mentioning before, one of the previous interviews we did was with Adams Down Arts Association.
And they had run a program here. Did you?
No.
No? I'm involved in that. Just thought I would ask.
So what... they obviously have a craft room and they do sports. What are some of the other programs that they have available?
Well I'm only involved in the English language teaching and the fan group. I know there's lots of other things going on.
But exactly what I don't know.
But I guess that the main thing is it's a centre for people to come together, asylum seekers and refugees, where they get companionship.
I think the biggest thing is probably the cafe. Where people can go in and they'll have a friendly face to chat with.
Do you know how many volunteers are...
I don't know. I don't know.
And the thing is I love doing this. It's completely informal. I've found my own way in and I now do what I enjoy.
And I've got to know people and chat to all sorts of people.
But the formal structure I don't know.
Are you given a lot of autonomy to choose what kinds of things you do?
Yes, yeah. I think I am, yeah.
And the thing is I choose to do this work and I love OASIS and I come down a couple of times a week.
And I could do a bit more if people ask me or if there's a specific thing I would like.
But I'm very boundaried in terms of I don't want to take on too much.
Because the people at OASIS, the asylum seekers and refugees are, in my experience, lovely good-hearted people.
But their needs are immense.
And I don't want to... I'm not going to give too much.
Because it would just suck me dry.
Just give what you can.
Yeah, well, I give what I can and I give what I enjoy giving.
But I've got the luxury of saying so far but no further.
Does anybody else in your family or friends volunteer here with you?
Yeah, not my family but my... I've got some friends come.
They came out to help out with English as well, yeah.
Probably two other friends.
Were you the inspiration for that?
I wouldn't say inspiration but...
Yeah, I put the finger on them and they come.
And in fact my friend Stuart comes and he loves it.
He absolutely loves it.
Are there any frustrations or disappointments that you find by doing volunteer work?
No. As I say, if I've found any frustrations or disappointments or anything I didn't like, I just wouldn't do it.
Because I'm retired. I've got the luxury of choosing what I do and what I don't do.
So it is very luxurious.
Do you have any favourite memories of volunteering here that stand out?
I'm sure I have. It doesn't occur to me at the moment but I'm sure not.
If it comes back to me I'll tell you.
It's one that's hard to do on the spot.
For example, the women that came from Mosul and some women that came from Aleppo.
Another very powerful experience was when a woman came to the discussion group and she was from Syria and couldn't speak much English.
But she told you very clearly what it was like to go through that experience.
She made her journey with her family from Syria, a war tour zone, via Libya.
And she told us how on one occasion she was stopped at where the Czech soldiers are.
And her daughter was taken away and raped.
And then they got on a boat to come to Europe and the boat sank and two of her sons were drowned.
And what do you say?
That was very memorable. Not the best memory but extremely memorable.
Do you think that volunteering here has changed you in any way?
I think it's enriched my life. I don't know if it's changed me but I've met some good people here and I've become friends with a few refugees.
Which is really good. So I think it's built on my life. I'm still the same old difficult bugger I was.
How do you think your volunteering or even volunteering here has benefited the wider community and the people that come in here and seek help?
The wider community? I don't know.
But the people who've come here.
But I think just a friendly UK national who can speak the English language and is willing to talk.
I think that's my guess. I think that's more than a guess.
That is beneficial to the refugees and asylum seekers who want to learn English.
Because they, like everybody, if you go abroad on holiday, like to Spain, go with your friends or your family.
And it's incredible how little Spanish you'll have to speak.
You point, say por favor, dos, and that's about it.
But you don't have to learn. And this is the same with people here.
People come from Eritrea. They live together. They have their little Eritrean cafe.
And so the old bit of English. So to actually speak with a UK native speaker, I think is immense.
And so do you actually lead the ESOL classes?
No, I am the helper. They tried to make me the teacher, but I refuse.
I am a very experienced helper for the teacher.
But a very bad English teacher.
What does helping entail?
What it entails is you have the teacher, the front is called Richard, very nice man.
And help, I ask him awkward questions.
Because I find my natural environment is to sit at the back with the African men, right?
Who tend to be a bit, you know, keep out of the way.
But I encourage them to come forward.
Do you bring a little bit of comic relief?
That's the one, yeah, comic relief.
Good.
Thanks, can I ask you?
If you had to define volunteering, how would you define it?
I don't know.
I don't get any monetary reward.
I come along and do what I can.
That's volunteering.
And I think I do it because I think if it's worthwhile, I think it was not worthwhile.
I wouldn't bother.
Although I did, and I did do, I don't know if you want me to go on to another bit of volunteering.
I did some volunteering a couple years ago and it was a project, it looked brilliant.
It was working with primary school kids and it was specifically shy, withdrawn primary school kids.
Oh, it's lovely.
I saw the video and all these poor little children, you have to be very careful and bring them out of their shell.
Oh, that's brilliant.
What did you do with that project?
Well, I got assigned with three other volunteers and we went to this primary school and ADHD,
challenging behaviour problems, I wouldn't put them down as shy little children.
They were full on.
Which primary school was it?
Yes, I can't remember the name, but it was like towards Llanrhymne here, I think Llanrhymne.
But the kids were very challenging.
And I thought, hang on, you're a big man with a big loud voice, so take it easy.
Let the young women come forward, you know what you're doing.
But they ran rings round us and by the time I thought, hang on, time to step forward,
they were already running the show.
This is over a period of weeks.
So in fact that wasn't a good experience.
What I'd like to ask actually is if you had to give some advice or words of inspiration
to somebody who was interested in volunteering, what would you say?
Well, give it a go.
Give it a go.
I mean in terms of Oasis, I would say give it a go and it's immensely rewarding.
The people there, the refugees and the silent seekers are really good hearted people,
so give it a go.
But be boundaried because their needs are immense.
So you could be swallowed up.
So you need to be careful.
And in fact I say this to my friends when they come along, you know,
just do, it would be very tempting to get too involved,
but that's the advice I would give in this project.
Is there anything you'd like to add that we haven't asked to do?
No, I don't think so.
How much do I get paid?
There's a volunteer as well.
Oh, I thought it was worth a favour.
Get a can of four Polish lagers, strong 5%.
Sorry.
But thank you very much for your time.
Thank you.